#TITLE# Children Of The Moon, Part III
This is a test file for a document with no chapters.
We emerge from the bush, scrambling for safety, willing our legs to carry us faster further away. The clearing saves our lives. A few meters further, a few unobstructed strides. That's all it takes.
There's a crack like close thunder somehwhere directly behind us. A second later I'm knocked off my feet by a blast of air, cool air, dense with humidity. Somewhere to my left Sharon cries out. She sounds hurt, but there's nothing I can do. My head rings, my arms and legs don't seem under my direct control, and there's a good chance I might be screaming. Debris rains down around me. I try to cover my head with my hands, for all the good that will do. Somewhere close by something heavy hits the ground with dull thud. A boulder? A tree?
I collect my wits. It takes longer than I'd like. I'm down and vulnerable while I do, not something I want to be, not out here. 
I can't see Sharon, but that's okay. She can take care of herself. She can probably take care of me. My eyes are instantly drawn to where it happened. That mythical sky-response, the thunder that kills. Where the lightning struck there is nothing but torn vegetation. The scrub brush and trees have been shorn clean and cast aside. A light milky dew covers every surface.
The destruction traces a ragged but surpringly exact circle. The edge is a bit fuzzy, but you can see where it ended. The plants there are damaged but not destroyed, not ripped from the ground and tossed aside.
"Holy crap," Sharon says. She's standing now, waist-deep in long grass. This is a blessed sign, because if she can walk she'll probably make it through this alive. Which means we'll probably make it through this alive. "I honestly didn't think the stories were true."
The storm passes, thankfully, slower than I'd wanted but faster than I'd hoped. We make a shelter as we've done every night before but neither of us can sleep. We both know what can happen if we fall asleep and another storm comes along. At this time of year they form with alarming rapidity. Even though I know somewhere in the front of my brain that lightning is unlikely to strike that close again, that it almost always strikes somewhere in the distance, the back bit of my brain, the animal bit knows no such thing. It simply says, if you sleep, you die.
Besides, the night is warm enough to make sleeping distant and uncomfortable as it is. So we sit in the darkness at the edge of our shelter watching the stars, some distant, twinkling, stationary, some passing across the sky, tracing their unpredictable orbits.
"Do you ever notice how the wandering star never wander in exactly the same place?" I ask. I've thought about this often. Every night with absolutely no other light than Luna and the stars, I've had a chance to wonder about this.
"No," she replies. "Not until now. Why do you suppose they would?"
I shrug. "I don't know, it just seems like they should. The other stars are always in roughly the same place depending on the time of year, but the wandering stars have no pattern, at least not that I can make out."
As usual she's more concerned about practical thing over theory. "How do you track them?"
"At home, in the camp, I laid out a kind of star map using a bunch of different rocks," I say. "On the clear nights when the moon was out I would check the brightest stars and map where they were in relation to others. I gave them names and eventually didn't need the map."
"Naming stars." She sounds amused. "But there are so many stars!"
"Not all stars are important. Just the bright ones."
We are silent for a time, listening. It seems important to talk but we know it's important to listen. There are things in this wilderness that could kill us both just because we're here.
Not that either of us has seen these things. We've been told, like we were told of the thunder-that-kills. More than ever, I'm convinced that these stories are true. For a long time I doubted them. I hadn't seen such a thing. I'd certainly heard that cracking high-pitched thunder from a distance, but I'd never seen it. Never witnessed it first-hand.
There weren't many that had. Once we returned, I'd have a nice story to tell.
Some child in the camp wouldn't believe it and would have to be shown, of course. Which, now that I think of it, is probably why we were sent here in the first place. To witness.
But like so many things this ritual is hard to understand. It's a thing passed down over time from the father from the father before him. Maybe there was a time when the rituals weren't rituals at all but things that were done for a reason. Maybe back then the reasons were less opaque, more immediate. 
Since then the stories have evolved into stories of ghosts in the dark, thunder-that-kills, all these things. And the rituals hadn't changed. So the stories that we had to believe were connected to rituals we had to perform.
Now I know. Maybe that's a way to make sense of it to my children. These things are serious. We do them not just to do them, but to survive.
This is what I think about when I have time to think, when all the hard work of gathering and sharing and trying not to starve is over and the day is winding to a close. This is why Sharon had audibly groaned when I was chosen as her partner. She was quick with the knife. I was quick with words. And as she might point out, words don't often get you out of trouble.
"Did you hear that?" Sharon whispers, suddenly. She's drawn that knife, the flint of it dull in the night's pale light.
"No," I say. "What?"
"I heard something out there, something big. Stay here."
She moves off, quickly, silently. I'm constantly left in awe of the way she moves without difficulty, without making a sound in the thickest wilderness. I diplace everything when I move. 
I decide to obey, to stay in the shelter. I hunker down, trying to move as little as I can. I can see nothing out of the ordinary, nothing but the usual night's movements. Small things swaying in gentle wind.
Somewhere beyond my eyeline someone cries out. But not Sharon. No, it sounds like... a man?
But that's not possible, I think. I try to blend in, to get as close to the ground as possible.
"Let's go," Sharon says, appearing off to the side. Her knife glints in the darkness, wet with something. Blood?
We go, quickly, again trying to make as much distance as we can between us and whatever's out there. She runs, graceful, like a night creature. My arms accumulate a thousand tiny cuts.
Sharon drags me over the crest a hill. She spies a thicket of long grass or reeds and hisses, "Down!" We both flatten ourselves into the soft ground. Mud seeps up into my clothes. 
I hear nothing. It appears she hears nothing either. After a long, tense silence we both relax.
"What was it?" I ask in the quietest voice I've ever used.
"It was..." Sharon pauses. "I think it was a man."